[Music]
well thank you so much uh and I'm
delighted to be here thank you for uh
putting on such an amazing uh Symposium
and uh giving me the opportunity to
share some thoughts with you in in long
form so uh what I'm going to talk about
today is uh basically uh the fields of
collective intelligence in
unconventional spaces and if anybody
would like to get in touch with me
afterwards all of the primary papers the
software everything else is is is here
so I want to start by uh just showing
one of my um one of my heroes Alan
Turing we all know that he was a
forefather of artificial intelligence he
was very interested in uh this idea of
of of creating uh cognitive systems and
and various kinds of intelligence um and
uh this is this is this is well known
what's maybe less well known is that the
same person was really interested in
morphogenesis he wrote one of the very
early uh papers on uh on trying to
understand self-organizing chemical
systems and you might wonder why it is
that the same person would be interested
in intelligence and morphogenesis and I
think that uh he saw a very deep uh
parallel between these two these these
two areas of study and I think he was
right on the money in the sense that um
I think these are actually very much the
same question now most of the time when
we think of intellig
we think of something like this so
here's a brain and we think of okay
here's a here's a what quote unquote
centralized intelligence of some some
animal um and then we look at things
like this ant colonies and so on and
sometimes we talk about them as uh
distributed or collective intelligence
is swarm cognition and so on you know
Ricard solay calls them liquid brains
but actually it's it's important to
realize that this is just a matter of
scale because if one Zooms in you find
out that we are all in fact Collective
intelligences and we are all made of
something like this so this is a single
cell this is a lacr Maria it has no
brain it has no nervous system it has no
cellto cell communications or stem cells
or any of the things that we're used to
having in bodies and what it what it
does is it handles all of its local
needs so so morphological behavioral
metabolic and so on at the Single Cell
level very competently and the amazing
thing about this is that we all have
taken the same uh
Journey from
on track from um what what might be
called just physics which is an oite
right a a a set of uh uh a set of
chemical reactions that people would
look at and would think okay this this
has no cognitive capacity this is just
just some physics and chemistry and yet
uh slowly so over a matter of some
months and and maybe years this process
gives rise to these amazing morphologies
and in fact to highle human cognition
that has second order you know
metacognition and self-awareness and so
on and so this is a journey across the
cartisian cut that we all take if you
follow your own uh your own development
back far enough you will find this and
before that you will find just so quote
unquote just physics so it's really
interesting to to ask how how this
transition works this this smooth
transition and so the main points that
I'm going to try to transmit today are
these first that biology uses a kind of
multiscale Competency architecture of
nested problem solvers and that
navigation is a really Central concept
to try to understand navigation of
spaces in particular is Central concept
to try to understand this um I'm going
to claim that gold directedness is a is
a critical invariant for recognizing
building and uh uh relating to various
unconventional agents and I'll describe
a kind of cognitive boundary model for
the scaling of goals I'm going to uh
spend about half the talk showing you
one specific example in detail which is
this idea that uh pattern formation
biological pattern formation is
literally the behavior of a collective
intelligence of cells in a space known
as morphospace and uh I'm going to show
you that bioelectrical networks are the
uh protoc ogni medium the ancest of of
brain function and uh this this idea
actually has some very practical impacts
on biom medicine this is not just sort
of philosophy this has very specific
applications and in the end I'm going to
show you how uh synthetic bioengineering
provides a really astronomically large
option space for new bodies and new
minds that don't have standard
evolutionary backstories so we'll get to
that towards the end so uh single cells
have some really uh interesting spatial
competencies that we can start off by
thinking what so this is a diom this is
a single cell and that particular very
particular structure is something that
it can reliably acquire this is a
collection of uh several acetabularia
algae each one of these things is in
fact a single cell it has one nucleus
the whole thing is maybe uh you know six
or seven centimeters long it has some
Roots it has a stock it has a cap here
the whole thing is just one cell and so
this it's quite interesting to ask how
it is that a single cell can have such
such profound morphological
differentiation but these uh these
competencies are not only spatial they
are also uh behavioral and so what
you're seeing here is a slim mold this
is a pharum polyfilm it is the whole
thing is one cell it can be it can grow
to be very large but the whole thing is
one cell and so when you place it in the
middle of this this petri dish the
little white circles are glass discs
there's nothing there's no food there's
no chem they're completely inert glass
so what it will do as it grows during
the first few hours it sort of grows
evenly outward like this and what it's
doing during this time is sending out
vibrations into the medium it pulses and
sends vibrations into the medium reading
back the vibrations that that return so
it's almost a kind of sonar it's sensing
uh sensing the properties of the medium
and by doing this it can actually build
a map of its environment and then
reliably make its way over to the
heavier Mass so it can reliably detect
three discs over one and you can all
sorts of fun experiments of stacking
them one on top of each other and
distributing them but it has an amazing
ability to sense the mass in its
vicinity and to make both morphogenetic
and behavioral decisions based on that
information okay so so you can you can
see this this cell navigating in this in
this space according to the to the
biomechanical information that it has so
I'm going to uh show you four basic
things today so so first I'm going to um
try to uh uh introduce some some biology
that you may or may not have seen before
designed to really kind of stretch our
idea of what is an organism what is a
mind what does it mean to navigate space
and so on and then then we'll get into
this very specific examples of
bioelectricity and morphogenesis and
then uh we'll talk about some of these
novel organisms so uh the kind of the
traditional view is is of these um
discreet static natural kinds you have a
particular animal maybe you have a rat
that you're studying in a maze or a
human subject or whatever you have and
that's you know that's kind of that's
kind of your unit but I want to I want
to go beyond this this sort of Garden of
Eden View and really emphasize that
agents that do these intelligent things
are incredibly plastic so here's one
familiar example here we start with a
caterpillar this is a creature that
lives in a in a largely two-dimensional
world that crawls around on flat
surfaces it chews leaves and it has a
brain appropriate for that purpose it
has to turn into a butterfly which is
going to live in a very much a
three-dimensional World it has to fly it
has to drink nectar uh and uh and it
needs a completely different brain this
is a soft-bodied robot this is a
hardbodied you know needs a a controller
suitable for hard kinds of bodies and so
in between what happens is during this
process the brain is largely uh largely
um destroyed most of the connections are
broken down most of the cells die and
and the new brain is rebuilt during the
lifetime of the organism so you know
this this this this kind of change makes
the the confusion of puberty seem like
um real Child's Play you know in the
sense that this is a sing agent
radically changing its its its brain and
its body and the amazing thing about it
is that uh memories that the caterpillar
acquires are retained in the moth or
butterfly so this has been shown so
despite the despite the uh
disaggregation of the brain actually
some information is able to make it
across in fact this can be even more
radical these are these are plenaria
these are flat worms and you'll see a
lot more about them in this talk the
plaria regenerate any part of their body
so you cut them into pieces the record
is something like 275 pieces each piece
regrows exactly what's missing including
the brain and you get perfect little
worms so um James McConnell back in the
60s made an observation and uh it was um
uh you know quite controversial at the
time but we repeated it and and actually
discovered he was he was absolutely
right what happens is that if you if you
train these plaria to recognize a
particular region of their environment
let's say one with these little little
bumps laser etched into it as the place
where they get fed you can then amputate
The Head and the Brain I mean these
animals have a true centralized brain
amputate the head in the brain leave the
tail the tail sits there for eight or
nine days doing pretty much nothing
eventually it grows a new a fresh brain
and somehow that information is
imprinted onto this new brain and these
animals show show retention of that of
that memory so the information moving
through the body being imprinted from
from one tissue onto another is
something that uh we we really need to
start to understand and in fact uh
Beyond uh Beyond those kind of
experiments you can do this vertebrates
we did this in the tple so this is a
tple of the Frog zenopus lais um here's
the brain here are the nostrils here's
the mouth the gut and the tail one thing
you'll notice is that what we've done is
we've prevented the normal eyes from
forming we've put an ectopic eye on the
tail so this is a this is an eye that
forms on the tail and the amazing thing
about these animals is that with no long
in fact with no period of evolutionary
adaptation to this new configuration
they can see perfectly well out of these
eyes so we've made a device that tests
them on visual training cues and sort of
automates the same thing we use to test
the planarian memory it's an automated
Behavior testing device and what we
found is that this I finds itself in a
completely novel environment surrounding
my muscle instead of near the brain puts
out an optic nerve that optic nerve
might connect to the spinal cord it does
not go up to the brain the brain that
evolved for tracking visual data from
these two locations suddenly gets
information from some weird itchy patch
of tissue on its tail no problem it
recognizes that as visual data and these
animals behave quite well in uh in
learning assays so so navigating um
navigating your world with a radically
different um configuration of sensory
and and processing organs so what we
really see in biology is that not only
are we nested dolls structurally I mean
we all everyone knows that groups
consist of individuals made of organs
tissues cells and so on but actually
each one of these levels has competency
it solves problems in its own space and
there are lots of different kinds of
spaces and that multiscale architecture
uh which is uh which is kind of unique
it's something that um in in engineering
we're still really not not able to uh re
recapitulate although we're getting
there uh shows competency in many many
different spaces now now the one thing
I'd like to I'd like to do fundamentally
is to uh generalize this idea of being
able to perform intelligently in some
space so
typically typically we think about
threedimensional
spaces so uh Behavior moving the body in
three-dimensional space so it's very
easy for us to to recognize intelligence
in those spaces because all of our sense
organs Point outward and from the time
you were very little you were collecting
data on object medium-sized objects
moving at medium speeds around you in
three-dimensional space and and we know
how to recognize you know birds and and
mammals and other things be behaving
intelligently what we don't have are
senses that directly show us for example
imagine that you had a you were born
with a sense that where you could
actually feel your blood chemistry all
the different things going on in your
blood physiology and all of the things
that your liver pancreas and other
organs were doing in that case we would
have a training set that would allow us
to understand intelligent navigation of
other spaces so that would be
physiological space so the space of
physiological parameters um it might be
a transcriptional space so the space of
gene expression all the different gene
expression domains or in fact
morphospace this the the space of all
possible anatomical configuration we'll
talk more about that I want to show you
um and and and this this the the fact
that we're not uh familiar with these
other spaces means that when we make uh
claims about the cognitive level or the
intelligence level of other systems
we're really taking an IQ test ourselves
what we're really saying is this is what
we've recognized the system to be doing
but we can't really assume that uh that
we're smart enough to know exactly what
it's doing and what it's solving in all
of the different spaces I want to show
you a simple example again these are PL
these are the planaria and what we found
is that if we put plenaria into a a
solution of barium chloride so barium is
a non-specific potassium channel blocker
it prevents these cells from uh
exchanging potassium with the outside
world so when you do this literally
their heads explode okay their heads
just overnight they they blow up but the
amazing thing is that if you keep the
rest of the worm in barium over the next
couple of weeks they regenerate they
grow a brand new head and the new head
does not care about barium whatsoever
the new head is barium adapted that's
kind of amazing and so we asked a simple
question we just looked at the
transcriptomes of of naive worms versus
barium adapted heads and we just asked
well what gene expression is different
okay what's different about these barium
adapted heads and one thing we found is
that there's only a handful of genes
there's less than a dozen genes that are
in fact different and so this this uh
system is able to figure out which genes
to up and down regulate so that it can
do its business without being able to
pass pottassium properly but the
incredible thing about this is that
barium is not anything that plenaria
ever see in the wild this is completely
uh a completely unnatural novel stressor
so so it's implausible to think that at
some point there was evolutionary
pressure to develop a response to Barium
so what you're really talking about here
is you're in the you're in the space of
gene expression which is you know let's
say if they have 20,000 GS it's it's a
massively um you know very high
dimensional space and you need to walk
in that space to find the the exact uh
genes that are going to solve your
physiological stressor now you don't
have time to sort of randomly flip genes
on and off first of all because it'll
it'll most likely kill you before you
find the good concent the good
combinations also also there's no
there's no time for that these cells
don't turn over that fast it's not like
a bacterial evolutionary system so it's
still very much an open question how how
do they navigate this this
transcriptional space to to solve these
kinds of solve these kinds of problems
so this this this to me is is is very
much an example of of of intelligence in
the sense of problem solving taking what
you already might know maybe there's
information about what to do in a case
of epileptic seizures or so on and
bringing it to a new a new scenario and
so so I've been working on this on this
framework it's called T tame for it
stands for technological approach to
mind everywhere and the goal of this
framework is to be able to uh recognize
uh create and relate to truly diverse
intelligences so we need to handle of
course the things we're familiar with
birds primates and so on but also weird
Colonial organisms and swarms and things
like that um of course all the new
things that are being produced by
synthetic morphology and synthetic
biology approaches and possible
exobiological agents because studying uh
just the natural um systems that are
that that that are here on Earth and and
making conclusions about biology from
them is a little bit like testing your
your theory on the same data set that
that created it right it's all just an N
of one uh pass through um through
philogenetic space so so I I I tend to
think about all kinds of conventional
different different types of embodiments
whether they be evolved designed
whatever and really think about this
kind of this is a scale by Rosen Bluth
Weiner and Bigalow looking at all the
different kinds of behaviors that one
might have in one's space notice that it
says nothing about what it's made of it
doesn't doesn't say anything about
having brains or being a specific kind
of organism or scale temporally or
whatever it's it's all it's all very
functional so this is this is this is
how we think about things in myig gr and
the key to this framework is that it has
to uh move experimental work forward
forward it has to enable new
capabilities and um I'm going to show
you I'm going to show you how that
happens but first let's just think about
uh this this one particular kind of
intelligence which I think is is super
interesting um anatomical uh control as
a as a collective intelligence first of
all um notice the basic thing that needs
explaining which is that we all Start
Life as a collection of embryonic blastr
and these this this is a cross-section
through a human torso so this is what uh
what each of us has inside now look at
all the in incredible
complex and variant order all the all
the tissues and structures everything is
in the right place next to each other
the right orientation size and so on so
the first question is where is the shape
encoded how do how how do these cells
know to make exactly this and you might
be tempted to say DNA and and genomes
but we can read genomes now and what we
see is that genomes directly code for
protein structure so the genome
specifies the micr level Hardware that's
present in every cell but uh there's
nothing directly that you can read out
in the genome about the Symmetry type of
the organism the size the shape how
regenerative it's going to be um this is
very much an open problem of how cells
know what to what to make and when to
stop uh as workers in regenerative
medicine if parts of this are missing
we'd like to know how to signal the
cells to rebuild to do it again and as
Engineers we'd like to know well what
else is possible Right given the exact
same genome what else can we ask these
cells to do or is this the only thing
they could possibly do and you can you
can sort of visualize forward the
endgame of this whole field is something
like this it would be an anatomical
compiler where you should be able to sit
down and draw at the level of anatomy
the animal or plant that you want okay
not not the not the pathways not genes
but but the actual anatomy and uh if we
knew what we were doing we would have a
system that um de that that compiled
that description into a set of stimuli
that would have to be given to cells to
get them to build this particular thing
in in this case a nice three-headed
planarian now we don't have anything
remotely like this is is a very long
long-term goal and the reason that uh
it's really important is because if you
think about it um pretty much every
problem of biom Medicine with the
exception of infectious disease so birth
defects uh tra traumatic injury cancer
aging degenerative disease all of these
things boil down to one problem how do
you convince cells to build the exact
structure that you want if we solve that
problem all of this goes away we'd be
able to fix birth defects regenerate
limbs reprogram tumors all of this would
would would go away but it's a major
major problem why do we not have a an
anatomical comp yet so I want to be
clear that um despite the incredible
progress in genetics and molecular
biology we Face very fundamental
questions that have to do with not not
with the molecular mechanisms but with
the decision-making so here's a simple
example um here is this is a baby axel
lottle so Axel are Mexican salamander
here's a baby axel lottle and baby axel
have legs here's a tadpole of the frogs
and aavas tpes do not have legs so now
in my group we make something called a
frogot so this is a half this it's a
chimera half Axel half frog you can mix
the the cells they they cooperate with
each other just fine they make something
the Frog a lottle now I ask a simple
question you've got the genome to the ax
lle you've got the genome to the Frog
how come we don't have any models that
tell us whether frogot will have legs we
have no idea from from that information
whether frogot are going to have legs or
not and if they do have legs whether
those legs will be made of axotal cells
or also include frog cells we we have no
idea even though you've got the genetic
information so it's really important to
start to understand the algorithms
because where um where biom medicine is
right now is that uh we're very good at
manipulating molecules and cells and
getting information like this which C
which Gene and protein talk to which
other Gene and protein we are a long way
away from actually controlling a large
scale Form and Function and in fact you
can think about the the kind of parallel
Journey that uh the computer science
took this is what programming looked
like in the 40s and 50s where in order
to control the system you had to
physically rewire it right you were
pulling wires in and out you have to
rewire it
nowadays uh for a joke I say to all my
students you know you're on your laptop
you're going to go from from Microsoft
Word to photoshop I want you to get out
your soldering iron and start rewire you
know start rewiring and of course they
all laugh because because nowadays we
don't need to do that we understand that
if your Hardware is good enough it's
reprogrammable with stimuli with inputs
with experiences not rewiring but of
course modern molecular medicine is all
about the hardware we're all we're all
very excited about genomic editing and
protein Pathways and single molecule
approaches and so I think the reason
that we are still roughly where computer
science was in the in the 50s is because
we are we've been neglecting one
important um aspect and that is uh
multiscale intelligence and biology now
what do I mean by intelligence I mean uh
what William James meant which is the
ability to reach the same goal by
different means and when when we talk
about pattern and Anatomy when I talk
about goals I mean regions of Mor space
now what's morphospace morphospace uh is
the uh the space of all possible
configurations of some particular
structure so if you're looking at uh
snail shells for example there are three
parameters that you can Define and uh
every shell is every every possible
snail shell is some point within this
morphos space okay and this is this is
an idea that's very that's very old in
fact Darcy Thompson in the 40s had this
interesting example in his in his book
on growth and form where he noticed that
if you just deform certain animal shapes
placed on a grid you apply specific
deformations to the grid what you get
are other other species that do exist
now at the time there was no molecular
um mechanism of course known there was
not nothing really you know really known
about this but I think I think now we
can we can we can do some some very
interesting things with this idea so uh
navigating these spaces changing your
body shape to move from one region to
another is not uh trivial because there
may be local Minima there may be
barriers there may be all kinds of
things so that that's the task that we
face as as as morphogenetic agents now
embryogenesis is very good at this
they're they're ex it's extremely
reliable so you start off in uh as as as
this you know as this kind of pattern
and eventually you end up here and
that's that's generally very low very
low error um but we can already see
actually that that this process is not
simply a kind of pre-programmed
hardwired walk in morphos space because
we can deviate in the in the middle so
for example we can take this nice uh
human embryo divide it in half literally
cut it in half and what you get are not
two half organisms you get two perfectly
normal monozygotic twins this this is
where twins come from and so this is a
regenerative event where each side each
half of this embryo basically realizes
that it's actually not where it's
supposed to be in morphospace uh and uh
and it needs to regenerate the other
half in order to make the correct
changes to get to its goal and where it
needs to go so this is not just
embryonic uh for example back to this
this um the salamander this um this Axel
lottle um these guys regenerate their
limbs their eyes their jaws their spinal
cords portions of their heart and brain
um their ovaries they're incredibly
regenerative as adults and what happens
is that uh you can amputate uh for
example this limb at different positions
no matter where you cut the cells will
very quickly grow they will grow exactly
what's needed to make a normal Axel Lim
and then they stop so this is a kind of
example of anatomical homeostasis they
will continue working from whatever
starting position until they get to the
until they get to where they're going
parenthetically this is not just for for
um for frogs and for you know axles and
and worms um the human liver of course
is regenerative even the ancient Greeks
knew that I have no idea how they knew
that but but it seems like they did um
Deer uh every year regenerate massive
amounts of of bone up to a centimeter
and a half of new bone per day uh bone
vasculature inovation skin and um even
human children below a certain age can
regenerate their finger tips if you just
leave it alone it'll basically regrow
cosmetically a very very nice um outcome
so we have we have some some ability to
uh to to improve our our position in
morphos space one of the most amazing
things about it is that as as a as a
body as a as a living creature you can't
count on your environment you can't
count on in other words you can't count
on the environment being the same as it
was before you can't count on not being
perturbed during the developmental
process maybe physiologically maybe
metabolically maybe um with a parasite
or teratogen so you can't count on that
and you still need to get your job done
in fact you can't even count on your own
Parts being what you expected them to be
now uh of course we don't have any
machines that can do this that can that
can repair themselves after damage or
put themselves together with diverse
Parts here this is this is one of my uh
favorite examples of all time this is a
a cross-section through a n um kidney
tubule so so here's the Lumin of the
tubul and these These are the cells that
make up the tubal normally it's let's
say around around eight cells that work
together to form this kind of tubule one
thing you can do is you can you can make
uh you can make these cells what's
called polyploid which means they have
extra genetic material amazing thing
number one with the ex excess genetic
material you still get a perfectly
normal n no problem that there are all
kinds of extra um in information around
no no no problem but what does happen is
that the cells get much bigger and as
the cells get physically bigger fewer of
them are needed to make the exact same
shape Lumen now that's that's amazing
thing number two is that these cells the
number of these cells will actually
scale to their correct size so that you
all you get the same final outcome with
different numbers of cells but the most
amazing thing is that when you make
these cells absolutely gigantic so that
only one cell is big enough to make the
whole Lumen what it will do is it will
no longer cooperate with other cells one
cell will bend around itself making the
exact same Lumen okay now the incredible
thing about that is this is a different
molecular mechanism this was cellto cell
communication this is cytoskeletal
bending and so what happens is that this
is a kind of a kind of top down kind of
top down causation where in service of a
large scale anatomical spec meaning
having the correct Lumen you can call up
different molecular mechanisms to get
the job done so this again sticking with
this this theme of intelligence is the
ability to uh uh handle novelty in terms
of getting to where you're going from
diverse starting positions uh with
perturbations both external and internal
you know your own parts are getting are
changing can you still do what you need
to do and all of this is is described in
in in some of these papers uh and then
and then the final thing is that your
your walk through morphospace doesn't
even have to be the same path so here
for example here's a here's a frog frogs
normally do not regenerate their legs as
I'll tell you momentarily we have
figured out a way to make them
regenerate their legs and when they do
so this is a pretty good uh frog leg
regeneration you can see here it's got
the it's got the toes the toenails the
webbing I mean everything's good but in
fact the way it got here is not at all
how frogs normally regenerate their
limbs normally develop their limb so
normal frog limb morphogenesis is here
you make these things and then you sort
of make that you you kill off the cells
in the middle to make the P the paddle
This is this grows in a completely
different way you've got the you've got
the middle this kind of middle stock
here with a toenail and then the toes
sort of come off to the side it looks
much more like a plant so it it takes a
different path through morphospace but
it ends up in the same place so all of
this all of this is is uh is is back to
illustrating some of these amazing uh
abilities of of these cells to um to to
to to navigate and so one very kind of
very very canonical example of this that
we discovered a few years ago is is this
so here's a Tull here's the gut the
brain the nostrils and the eyes here
this Tull needs to become a frog in
order to for a Tull face to be a frog
face things have to move so the Jaws
have to move the eyes have to move
forward everything has to move and it
used to be thought that this process was
hardwired because if you're a standard
Tull and you want to be a standard frog
all you have to remember is which
direction and by how much every piece of
the face moves what we did to and and we
suspected that there was more
intelligence to this process than that
and so we did an experiment we we
created so-called Picasso frogs and so
these are tadpoles in which everything
is messed up the eyes on the side of the
head the Jaws are off to the side the
nostrils are are too far back I mean
everything is in the wrong position and
we found that these animals still
largely make pretty normal frogs because
all of these pieces will move in novel
paths in fact sometimes they go too far
and have to double back to give you a
normal frog face so what the genetics
gives you is not some hardwired system
that always moves in the same way what
it specifies is a really interesting
error minimization machine that uh
however you start it off with obviously
with some limits uh will try to minimize
the error and get to the correct final
shape if we had a robotic swarm a
collection of robots that was able to do
this we would we would call this a
prize-winning example of collective
intelligence we don't have such a such a
technology yet so uh so so we we started
trying to understand this process how
how does all this work and so to this
standard feedforward kind of open loop
process of Developmental biology that
that you that you would read about in in
in in class where there are genes they
make proteins there's there some the
proteins in Trac are some physics and
chemistry and then there's this emergent
outcome we add to this these feedback
loops whereby this is actually a
homeostatic system if that if that uh
Anatomy is disrupted in some way by
injury by by um by injury by mutations
by teratogens by parasites whatever then
these feedback loops will kick in to try
to minimize error the cells will do what
they can to try to get back to the
correct shape it's a think think about
your thermostat it's a basic homeostatic
circuit now on the one hand this is
pretty pretty expected biologists know
all about feedback loops um and and so
on on the other hand there there there
are two kind of weird weird and unusual
things here the first is that every
homeostatic process has to have a set
point so if you're going to try to uh
get back to uh where you need to be you
have to remember where the right the
where the right position is you have to
store a set point we're used to thinking
about scalers single numbers as set
points so temperature pH things like
that uh but in this case the set point
is a some sort of a large scale uh uh
geometry it's a it's a descriptor of
some some kind of coar grain descriptor
of an anatomy so it's a complex data
structure and in general you know
biologists don't love to think about uh
goal directed processes the idea is
there're supposed to be emergence and
and kind of emergent complexity but this
idea that things are working towards a
goal the way that any navigational
system fundamentally does is really not
something that is is very comfortable
certainly for for molecular biology so
how would something like this how would
something like this work how could we
have a navigating uh system that that uh
can uh can have goals in anatomical
space and so here's where we start to
think about bioelectricity because our
best example of a a a mechanism that
allows us to navigate space towards
goals is uh the brain and in the brain
uh we know roughly what the architecture
looks like there are cells that
communicate with other cells and
networks these cells have ion channels
so these are little proteins that help
set a voltage to this cell and that
voltage may or may not be communicated
to its neighbors through these little
Gap Junctions these are like um like
electrical synapses that allow
electrical information to pass back and
forth and so so that's the hardware of
the brain and what that Hardware enables
is a kind of software that among other
things navigate spaces so here's a zebra
fish this is a movie uh taken by uh by
by this group here that shows all the
electrical activity in the living zebra
fish brain and so the commitment of
Neuroscience is that if we understood
how to decode this information we would
be able to know what the cognitive
content of this of this brain was so so
the the memories the preferences the
goals what whatever else the system was
going to do we should be able to decode
it so this is this is that cycle that's
called neural neural decoding right we
should be able to understand what what
all these patterns mean well it turns
out that uh this is not just for brains
this is an extremely ancient system um
all the cells in your body have ion
channels most cells have Gap Junctions
with each other and what we might be
able to do is just like neuroscientists
we might be able to extend this whole
scheme to ask what are your tissues
thinking about at any point in time
specifically to read the electrical so
this is a this is a time lapse of an
early frog embryo the colors are a
fluorescent die reporting voltage the
same way that we did here that was done
here with these with these zebra fish uh
and uh you we might be able to decode
this information to ask what are the
Targets in anatomical morphis bace what
is this thing going to build and so
there's this there's this amazing uh
isomorphism between the story of the
brain where you've got you've got the
the hardware and the software and
there's various experiences and various
other ways that this software gets
modified um the hardware basically just
gets built by in in development and what
what the brain does is it controls
muscles to move your body in
three-dimensional space now that's a
pretty cool trick where did it learn
this trick well evolutionarily this is
exactly the same as something that was
going on long before brains appeared
which is this exact same system but it
used to be for moving the body
configuration in morphospace before
there were nerves and muscles um cells
needed to talk to each other and process
information to get around in morphos
space and so uh We've argued in this in
this paper that basically neural neural
electricity is just an evolutionary
pivot across spaces from morphos space
to threedimensional space of a very a
very ancient system for processing
information long before brains arose so
so in my group we then we we we were
thinking about this and we asked this
question okay if that's if that's if
that's how how it works could we make
some tools to read and write this
electrical information and to really
understand how it's navigating that uh
that that shape change space so we
developed the some of the first tools to
um uh read and write information into
nonbrain tissues so of course these dyes
so these are voltage sensitive
fluorescent dieses that report all the
electrical conversations that these
cells are having with each other so
here's a time lapse of these cells
figuring out who's going to be left
right dorsal ventral so so all of this
is is uh you're you're looking at these
cells having those conversations um we
do a lot of computational modeling to
ask okay given where the ions are going
how can we predict these voltages I'm
going to show you um two patterns here's
a here's a time lapse it's happens to be
grayscale but it's exact same idea uh
here's a time lapse of a frog embryo
putting its face together and what you
will see and this is this is one frame
out of that video what you will see is
this is this is something we call the
electric face discovered by my colleague
Danny Adams um when she was in my group
doing this profiling she found that at
at here's here's a particular frame from
that uh from that video where you can
see the the animals right eye the mouth
the uh the the plod all of this is
already demarcated uh before the Gen
start to come on and really pattern the
face this is a bi electric pre pattern
of what the future face is going to look
like and I'm showing you this one
because it's so simple it literally
looks like a face right there are other
patterns that are much more complex that
you can't really just you know sort of
visually decode but this one is very is
very clear this is the memory of what a
uh tple face is going to look like and
if you move this uh if you if you
disrupt this electrical pattern the gene
expression will change and the
organogenesis will change um and we I'll
show you the ex show you examples of
that momentarily so so this is a this is
a uh an endogenous pattern that is
required for normal development in fact
human channelopathies of the that human
patients that have cranofacial defects
often have mutations and ion channels
that that screw up this pattern now
that's so that's a normal pattern here's
a pathological pattern we've put in a
human oncogene uh these cells will make
a tumor but even before the tumor
becomes apparent you can already see
this bi electrical aberant bi electrical
signature of these cells B basally
disconnecting from the rest of the
tissue and going to their unicellular
ancient Behavior mode where the rest of
the body is just environment as far as
they concern so so so one one set of
tools is to track these bi electrical
changes now here's another important set
of tools to actually start to be able to
uh to write new information into it and
the way we do that we don't use any
applied electric Fields there are no
waves there are no magnets there's no
electromagnetic radiation what we do is
we do exactly what neuroscientists do
which is we um modify uh the endogenous
mechanisms by which cells establish
electrical signals so either ion
channels we can open them we can close
them we can use light or drugs to do
that um and and the Gap Junctions the
the electrical synapsis so we can
determine which cells talk to each other
cells by opening and closing these
little Gap Junctions it's very telling
that all of the tools of Neuroscience
work in other cell types basically the
tools can't tell the difference right
this this distinction between
neuroscience and and other cells in your
body is completely arici I and it's you
know it's a consequence of humans trying
to parse the world it's not um nature
doesn't doesn't obey that distinction so
what can you do with this okay I've been
talking about these this electrical
information what what what does it
actually do well here's here's a here
are a few examples one thing you can do
is you can take this this tadpole and
I've shown you the electric face and so
we asked the question okay if now now
that we know that there's a particular
voltage state that kick starts eye
development could we simply reproduce
that somewhere else so we took an ion
Channel RNA that we knew was going to
set the same voltage State we injected
it into precursor cells that are going
to give rise to the gut and sure enough
those cells can form a complete eye they
uh the eyes that are formed will have
all the right uh layers retina nerve you
know optic nerve all that lens and uh
and and and they can be formed anywhere
they can be formed anywhere anywhere in
the body as long as the cells get the
right pattern that tells them what organ
to make now notice two very interesting
things here one is that this instruction
is highly modular we provided a very
small piece of information just a
voltage pattern we certainly did not
give it all the information needed to
specify an eye eyes have many cell types
they're very complex there's no we have
no idea how to micromanage the creation
of an eye but what we provided was a a
kind of a sub rutine call a signal that
says build an eye here and the cells do
that's the first thing the second
amazing thing is that there are two
levels of instruction here one is US
instructing the cells build and ey but
here what you can see is this is a lens
sitting out in the flank of a of a of a
Sal TPO somewhere and the blue cells are
the ones that carry this ION channel
that we put in but there's not enough of
them to make a good lens so what they've
done is recruit their neighbors this is
why at the very beginning I pitched this
idea that frogot might have legs that
consist also of of of of frog cells why
would frog cells build a leg when when
they normally don't it's because cells
have the ability to instruct each other
about what to build and so these cells
right here they they've been told to
make an eye but there's not enough of
them and they know and so they they
recruit a bunch of their neighbors these
Brown cells that we never touched there
they're not these cells are completely
wild type and yet they're participating
in making the ectopic lens out in the
tail of a of a tackle so so there's this
amazing ability to to instruct and for
the cells to then instruct each other
now what else can we make well we can
make in using the same methodology by
manipulating these iron channels we can
make oocysts which are balance organs
like inner ear type of organs we can
make uh complete beating hearts so so
ectopic Hearts we can make extra
forbrain and then you could you can ask
if these animals are any smarter than
the the normal Tates we can make ectopic
limbs so you can see here uh all kinds
of extra extra legs that we can form and
we can even make fins now this last
one's kind of weird because tadpoles of
course aren't supposed to have fins
we'll get to that momentarily but what
you can see is that by changing the bi
electrical pattern using using
manipulation of ion channels you can
tell this Collective where to go in
morphospace meaning what types of or
they should be building you're not
micromanaging the specific each step
that they take they figure that out on
their own in fact we have no idea how to
how to do that for any of these complex
organs but you can you can indicate
regions about where it is that they
should be going and this has has
biomedical implications so frogs I told
you unlike salamanders do not regenerate
their legs so if if a leg is amputated
45 days later there's nothing what we've
done is come up with a a drug cocktail
that targets ion channels that um
induces leg regeneration and so you can
see here 45 days later there's already a
nice a nice leg forming the leg is touch
sensitive it's motile it's it's
functional um it has a pretty good
eventually it has a pretty good uh final
final pattern and so we're in the
process of uh Translating that to
mammals hopefully this will work I have
to do a disclosure here because this is
a commercial Venture Now morphos tical
Inc is a spin-off between myself and
Dave Kaplan where they the David's lab
makes these bioreactors that uh provide
that have an aquous environment for the
wound and then we provide the Ion
channel and other types of payload in
there to hopefully get leg regeneration
in mammals so this is a a clinically um
kind you know clinically relevant
approach so um I want to switch from
this now to show you another kind of
amazing example of um what bi
electricity does uh this is these a
plarium so so I've already told you they
they have incredible amounts of uh
regener of ability because of that
they're actually Immortal um there's no
such thing as an old planarian they do
not age so um
these animals pretty much go on forever
uh and uh and and and that's because of
this incredible ability to continuously
replenish and regenerate to keep their
keep their pattern um perfect so I want
to show you I want to show you an
example this is this is a plarium one
head one tail you cut off the head and
the tail you got this middle fragment uh
we check we check the the gene
expression yep anterior genes are in the
head no anterior jeans in the tail
that's fine and 100% of the time it
makes this normal Offspring so so one
head one tail okay this it regenerates
now here what I'm going to show you is
that uh here here's this here's a
planarian one head one tail uh again
anterior genes where they're supposed to
be but when I cut this guy he makes a
two-headed form and I just told you that
this process was very reliable why in
the world would a one-headed animal make
a two-headed uh and this isn't Photoshop
these are real you know real live
animals so so here here are heads at
both ends well it's because in the
meantime we found that there's an
electrical circuit that actually helps
this tissue remember how many heads
there's supposed to be and what you can
do in the meantime is take this
one-headed animal and you can look at
the electrical pattern ah the electrical
pattern says one one head one tail and
we can alter that electrical pattern to
say no you're going to be you a proper
worm should have two heads now you can
see it's kind of a mess the technology
still being worked out but the but but
it's very clear we can we can we can
impose this pattern this is two heads
and when you cut that animal boom that's
what the cells make now this is really
critical to understand this bi electric
pattern is not a map of this two headed
guy this bi electrical pattern is a map
of this one-headed animal into which we
incepted a false memory of what planaria
are supposed to look like and they sit
there this memory sits there latent do
doing nothing until you injure them once
you injure this animal that is when they
will the cells will pay attention to
this pattern and they will go ahead and
make a two-headed animal so if you're
wondering where
counterfactual um where the ability to
consider counterfactuals came from this
kind of mental time travel where you can
consider uh things have memories and
have predictions about things that are
not happening right now this is perhaps
the uh the sort of U basil precursor of
that ability in morphospace this this
animal has a representation in
morphospace of where it will go if it
gets injured at a future time not what's
happening right now that's not this is
not where I am right now this is where
I'm going to go if I get injured now why
do I keep calling this thing a memory I
keep calling it a memory because if you
take these two-headed animals and simply
recut them again in plain water are no
more manipulations of any kind uh they
will continue to Res to to rebuild
two-headed animals and forever as far as
we can tell the the the question of how
many heads a planarian has is not
strictly determined by The genome
because we didn't touch the genome The
genome is wild type there's nothing
there's no genomic editing here the the
that information is sitting in an
electric circuit the default the
genetically said default is one head but
it's easily changed and in fact we can
now well now it's I say it's easy it
took us 10 years to to you know to
figure it out but in fact it's it's
quite readily done and in fact you can
uh you can set it back you can set it
back to being one-headed by by again
targeting the information in that
electrical circuit um the first time uh
I showed I showed these data somebody
stood up at a conference and said well
that's impossible those animals can't
exist so I I always bring this video so
everybody can see what uh what the
second and third generation of of these
guys look like uh so so this this has
all the properties of memory it's
long-term stable it's rewritable it's
got a little bit of liability so it's
rewritable it's got latency or
conditional recall so you can have a
single body can have memories of of what
a planarian is supposed to look like
that aren't true right now and it has
discret possible outcomes so one of the
things that we're doing now is is really
trying to integrate models of the
physiological State space of of this
animal that where where the circuit the
electrical circuit has has a state space
where there are attractors that
correspond to one heads two heads no
heads and so on and merge that with uh
models of connectionist artificial
neural network uh type of processes
where where we already know how to build
networks that for example do pattern
completion and they have a memory of
what the pattern should be and if part
of that part of that pattern is missing
they can reproduce it and so on this is
all this is all part of one problem and
and the key is tying it all together in
uh with with these quantitative models
that show how this electrical circuit
navigates morphospace now what I've
shown you is that you can tweak that
electrical circuit to find an attractor
that has two heads instead of one head
but what else is there what else does
this space actually have let's explore
that a little bit well the first thing
you find is that well it contains head
shapes of other species so what you can
do is you can take this planarian cut
off the head uh perturb the electrical
circuit for about 48 hours then let them
let it go and when it finally settles
down into the correct attractor it
doesn't always find the right one so
some percentage the time it goes back to
normal and makes this nice triangular
head from D dphil but some sometimes
it'll make a round head like this s
mediterrania sometimes it'll make a
flathead like this pelina in fact this
is a stochastic process the frequency of
these uh is proportional to The
evolutionary distance between the real
um um uh the real species that are being
mimicked here and again no changes to
the genome there's nothing genetically
wrong with these animals but you can you
can find these other attractors and it's
not just for head shape it's the shape
of the brain the distribution of the
stem cells become just like these other
spe species and it's about they're about
100 to 150 million years distant okay so
so you can find those attractors with
the exact same genetics uh in fact you
can find shapes that uh don't that that
that don't correspond to any real
planarian as far as we know you can make
these crazy uh spiky forms you can make
a different uh symmetry type so this
kind of cylindrical radial symmetry
instead of a flat bilateral symmetry you
can make combinations where where
there's a flat worm with a big tube
growing out into the third dimension and
again nothing wrong with the hardware
there's no no no mutations there's
nothing wrong with the genome it's
exploring the it's bi electrically
exploring the space of where it can be
and so the idea is what we're doing now
is is building these uh kind of full
stack models that that try to integrate
all the way from the molecular
information about what channels do you
have to work with so the hardware all
the way up through the physiology of
okay well what does this mean for the
voltage States across the tissue to well
what does that mean for the identity of
different organs along the primary axis
to what kind of algorithm is this whole
thing uh is this whole thing um
implementing such that we could actually
understand the algorithm and intervene
right so so make make changes and for
this we have we have all kinds of
computational platform such as such as
this which allows you to load up
electrical circuits into cells and then
um simulate simulate tissue and organ
level Dynamics to understand what the
large scale computations are
okay and and so so just as a simple
example again of of of why this is why
this is useful and what the what the
Practical implications of this are we
use this this strategy to find a a
technique for repairing birth defects so
here's a tple here's the forebrain
midbrain and hindbrain if it's exposed
to nicotine or various other teratogens
you can see there's massive defect so
the the the brain is basically gone um
the forbrain is basically gone the
midbrain and highb brain are damaged and
so what we did is we built this this bi
electrical model that tries to explain
how does the brain know what its size
and shape should be and in cases where
for example here this is even worse than
a teratogen we mutated a key
neurogenesis Gene this is a gene called
Notch so this Gene is mutated you can
see the forebrain is just gone the
midbrain and hindbrain are a bubble
these animals have no Behavior they just
lay there doing nothing it's a very
strong defect what we found what we did
was we asked that model um Which ion
channels would we have to open and close
to get back to the correct bioelectrical
memory of what a what a correct brain
should be basically how do I find my way
back in morphospace to what a correct
brain should be and the model made a
prediction we tested that prediction it
happens to be a a an already human
approved um set of drugs that can do
this and sure enough when we did it
there there you go uh they they their
brain structure comes back their brain
um gene expression comes back and their
IQ comes back so if you actually test
them for their learning rates they're
indistinguishable from controls even
though they've been exposed to
teratogens or or they have this really
nasty genetic defect some problems and
not all problems but some problems can
be fixed at the level of software
sometimes when your Hardware isn't quite
right you can make up for it in in
software by having a better navigation
policy through morphospace you're not
dead in you're not automatically dead in
the water if your Hardware is a little
wonky so what that means is uh we ought
to be able to create these pipelines to
uh to and we we've already we've already
started um to help design electrocutica
problem and you can ask the simulation
what type of Channel meaning what drug
can I use to get back to my correct bi
electrical pattern fundamentally this is
really the the the question of how do we
exploit this electrical interface that
these cells are ex exposing to us right
just like neurons do and people using um
electrodes and optogenetics and
everything else to control brains using
this electrical interface we can do
exactly the same thing to help guide
their navigation through morphospace
it's a it's a new way of to think about
getting making drugs for various
disorders of of of of development of of
injury and cancer and so on okay so so I
want to just just say a couple of things
uh before I wrap up here I want to say a
couple of things about uh the scaling of
cognition in this whole in this whole
business and then show you some some
novel synthetic living machines so the
first thing I want to point out is that
we've been I I I started out by saying
that thinking about fixed uh standard
animals is is kind of limiting and
that's
because the border between self and
world is is is flexible it can change so
so again here is a and and and what what
unifies all all of these different kinds
of weird intelligence is solving
problems in morphos space and in
physiological space and so on is their
ability to pursue goals meaning to
pursue the right region of that morphos
space so this kind of creature a single
cell can have pretty humble little tiny
goals right so so on the scale of some
number of microns it can it can pursue
State physiological States whole
metabolic States and so on but these
cells can cooperate and when they Co
when they cooperate they can pursue very
large goals so building a limb is a huge
goal no no individual cell knows what a
limb is or or can count fingers or
anything like that but the collective
sure can the collective will absolutely
pursue this particular region of
morphospace despite all kinds of
perturbations and when does it stop it
stops when when it reaches that area so
when it gets to where it's going and the
limb is correct that's when it stops so
there's a scaling of goals here now that
happens during Evolution and as you and
you as you'll see in a minute it also
can can happen right in front of your
eyes but the reverse process we're quite
familiar with and that's cancer so these
here are gly blastoma cells human gly
blastoma cells in culture cells can
defect from this uh kind of um from this
kind of situation once they electrically
isolate from their neighbors then as far
as they're concerned they're back to
they're back to this scenario the the
rest of the body is just external
environment to them their their goals
are little tiny goals what are the goals
of single cell systems well for every
cell wants to become two cells and it
wants to go wherever life is good and
that's metastasis and so that process
that's shrinking and growing in fact uh
these cancer cells are not any more
selfish than your normal body cells it's
just that the self is smaller right a
lot of a lot of work in um game theory
of of cancer that talks about
selfishness and lack of cooperation
they're not anymore selfish it's just
that the the self towards which they
work is just little little tiny the self
is very small whereas here the
electrical network is able to bind and
if people want I have I have all sorts
of stories about what exactly happens
when they bind together but I'll skip
that for now for for reasons of time um
when when individual cells bind into
networks those networks have a greater
ability to uh to store memory to have
anticipation of future events to
perceive spatial uh spatial kinds of
signals in their environment and so the
scale grows
and the uh the biomedical implication of
this is that if this were If This Were
true you should be able to reverse
cancer by artificially reconnecting
cells to their neighbors and in fact
that's what we've that's what we've done
so so when you have this this nasty
enene you can see that in red it's still
here you can prevent the tumor from
happening by putting in an ion channel
that forces these cells to remain in the
right bi electrical State despite the
fact that the enene is trying to um
disassociate them and if you do that the
physiology trumps the genetics it will
it will these cells will remain even
though the enogen is strongly expressed
the cells will remain uh making nice
muscle and skin and whatever else it's
it's supposed to make so so this this
this idea of of looking at the scaling
of the self and the scaling of these
goals has real uh practical uh
implications and in in my in my model
one of the things that um it allows the
framework to do is to compare directly
very diverse intelligences so any
intelligence be it evolved designed uh
some sort of hybrid some sort of alien
thing maybe sof pure software it doesn't
matter any agent has a set that that can
pursue goals you can simply plot the
size of those goals so so how big are
they in space and time right you might
have you might have a tick that only
cares about local butyrate concentration
and that's all that it's ever going to
care about and so it has a tiny little
um cognitive light cone that allows it
to pursue these tiny little goals and
you or you might have a dog which has a
bigger cognitive light cone and has some
pretty good memory going backwards has a
little bit of anticipation potential
forwards it's never going to care about
what happens Two Towns over three months
from now it's impossible that its goal
space is simply not that big right and
then you can have humans which uniquely
perhaps have uh have a cognitive light
cone that's bigger than their own
lifespan so the the human can comprehend
and pursue goals that are that are
guaranteed not achievable in your
lifetime and that for all I know that
may drive some interesting psychological
pressures that that humans face
but this idea that that we are all made
of a of a collective of Agents each of
these agents is solving problems in its
own space and within that space there
are differently scaled goals some some
very very you know very modest and some
some some massive you know some humans
are working for world peace and and and
you know these kinds of very complex
very large long-term things so the idea
is that in this multiscale system what
happens is that higher levels bend the
option space for their subunits so so so
in uh if if if you've got a
morphogenetic space that that uh that
that has attracted for different head
shapes that's because those those bi
electrical States distort the the space
of gene expression for their cells such
that all the cells need to do is go down
their concentration gradients the way
they normally do they don't have to know
where they're going but in fact they end
up at a very particular morphological um
outcome because because the higher level
has already distorted that space and so
there are all kinds of interesting work
to be done looking at mathematical
formalisms from relativity Theory and
and and from some other disciplines to
look at how at how that works and in
fact all that's happening here is the
scaling up of goals so once you have a
single cell that can do this cycle this
this test measure ACT test compare act
kind of cycle let's say for example for
keeping pH once you start connecting
cells into electrical networks now
everything scales up their goals are
bigger their memories are bigger the the
ability to act are bigger this is what
what evolution is is is doing it's
constantly scaling up these these
homeostatic units and it's actually uh
pivoting them through different spaces
so very simple kinds of
organisms uh all they could do is
Traverse metabolic space to keep alive
but eventually that works up to
physiological spaces then gene
expression becomes a thing and so they
can work in transcriptional spaces then
multi uh the complex Anatomy so so
morphos space and eventually when brains
and muscles show up you're in behavioral
space and who knows what other spaces
there are linguistically and there maybe
many others so just to close off in the
last few minutes um I want to I want to
show you an example of novelty uh so
I've been I've been talking about
intelligence and the idea that um these
uh all of these different uh different
systems are able to handle novel
conditions I want to show you an extreme
example of that so this is this is work
that Joshua bong guard's lab and and we
are doing in uh in in this new Institute
and we wanted to ask a simple question
well a set of questions one is how much
how much real-time plasticity really is
there I mean we've seen that you can get
you can get pretty far away from the
genomic default but what what else can
these cells do and in fact when we look
at development normal development to
what extent is it is it fooling us to
what extent are we basically lulled into
thinking that because o acorns make oak
trees and frog eggs make make frogs to
what extent are we really fooled into
thinking that that's basically all that
they can do and so we started asking
about you know what what might the
default competence of some of these
cells and tissues be okay and so so what
we did was was was this simple
experiment I'm just going to uh pause
oops I'm going to pause this here what
we did was uh a simple experiment where
um and this all the biology was done by
Doug Blackiston um in my group and the
and the computer science you're about to
see was done by uh Sam krigman um what
we did was we took some skin cells off
of a frog embryo and we put those skin
cells by themselves in a dish so we
didn't add anything there are no
nanomaterials there are no genetic
circuits being added there are no weird
trans genes or chemicals what we do is
subtract what do we subtract we subtract
all this other stuff we subtract all
their normal neighbors that are normally
uh instructing these cells as to what to
do and we give them a chance to reboot
their multicellularity now there's all
sorts of things they could do so so they
could just go and die they could spread
out and get away from each other they
could form a flat two two dimensional
monolayer the way that cell culture does
there many things that that could happen
and so so here's what happens we um we
dissociate these cells we put them in
this little little depression well
overnight they sort of come together
like this and then they form this little
round ball this the the flashes you're
seeing as calcium signaling so it's a
calcium sensitive di it um you they they
start to sort of signal to each other
and what they form is something we call
xenobots now why xenobots because
zenopus lavis is the name of the frog
and uh and it's a bior robotics platform
so the way it's the way they're they're
swimming is they have little hairs on
their surface these hairs called cyia
are normally used used to redistribute
mucus on the across the body of the Frog
here what they've done is they've sort
of they've learned a row and so and so
the cells the the sil are moving and
this thing is propelling itself they can
go in circles they can go straight back
and forth like this uh here you can see
a bunch of them in their various this is
just tracking data so so these two are
interacting these are sitting there
doing nothing this one's going on kind
of a longer Journey um here here's one
navigating a maze this is still water
there's no water mov m in here so it
moves along it takes the corn without
bumping into the opposite wall and then
at some point for reasons that nobody
nobody can predict yet uh it decides to
turn around and go back where it came
from so it it again goes long does not
need to bump into anything to know that
it could take a corner here and then at
this
point turns around turns around and goes
and and goes back okay now um one of the
things you can see with this calcium
signaling is that they're very active
this looks very brain-like this looks
very similar to that zebra fish kind of
signaling that that I showed you before
except there's no neurons here this is
just skin everything that you just saw
was 100% skin cells there's no there's
no brain here there's no nervous system
and so not only uh you know so so who
knows we we're still experimenting with
like what what might they be saying to
each other when they're when they're
doing this but what one thing you could
you can see they they do a couple of
interesting things one thing they can do
is regenerate so here's here's one that
was basically cut in half and now think
about think about the force look at that
hinge as it as it folds up think about
the the force that it takes to to to
clamp something shut from 180 degree
position but it basically folds up right
to be um back to its uh to its zenbot
shape and one of the things we started
thinking about is how can we how can we
predict what this kind of system is
going to do I mean nobody knew what what
they were going to do so so Josh
bongards lab started um modeling their
their behavior in this kind of
simulation the simulation can actually
tell you what the behavior of different
shaped Bots is going to be and then you
can go ahead and microsculpt them do
various things you can see the patterns
that this is just Carmine powder on the
bottom of the dish and these guys sweep
it along as they go so you can see all
the cool patterns that they make as
they're um navigating but but here's
something here's something interesting
if you if you um simulate them in in an
environment with a bunch of loose bricks
what you see is that they tend to they
tend to collect them into little piles
and so what what might be the
significance of that well it turns out
the real Bots do exactly that and if you
provide them so these are Z provided
with a bunch of loose SK skin cells so
these white dots are just loose skin
cells hanging around and what you'll see
is that these the the the xenobots will
run around they will collect either
together or individually they'll make
little piles and because this is an
agential material right these cells are
not passive they once the cells are
collected into a pile what do they make
they make xenobots so this is kinematic
self-replication these spots make copies
of themselves from the loose material in
the dish we've made it impossible for
them
to replicate the way that normally frogs
reproduce so they can't do that but
within 48 hours they show us that
there's another way to do this that as
far as we know no other animal uses it's
basically Von neyman's dream which is uh
machines that will go out and build
copies of themselves from parts that
they find laying around that's what's
going on here these xenobots build the
next generation of xenobots out of these
loose cells when those mature guess what
they do they run around do exactly the
same thing you get the Next Generation
and then the next Generation after that
now there's no strong heredity here yet
um as far as we know but uh and and the
reason it works this really critical the
reason it works is the exact same reason
that we were able to make xenobots in
the first place because these cells are
not passive Legos they are an agential
material that once they get together in
a particular group they know what to do
they they have an innate preference to
to make Bots that's that's why these
Bots are able to make new
bots so uh here's the uh here's kind of
the amazing thing about it is that um
same genome so if you were to sequence a
zenbot all you would ever see is the
zenopus slavis genome you'd have no idea
that it was any different that same
genome can do at least two different uh
life histories it can do this so so
normal T normal zenopus um uh stages and
then normal TPO Behavior or it can do
this so here's an early zenbot here's a
zenbot at about two months it's it has a
developmental sequence it's turning into
something what is that I have no idea
what that is there's never been there's
never been any xenobots before so it's
some kind of Novel uh novel
developmental stage and eventually they
they have these these kinds of behaviors
so we're still working out we don't know
how much cognition they actually have
can they do can they learn can they uh
do they have preferences what do they
react to We we don't know we're still
figuring that out but the amazing thing
about it is that uh for for for most
animals the way they navigate both
physical and anatomical space you when
you ask you know why do they have a
certain number of legs a certain color
certain behaviors it's all the answer is
always well because for millions of
years the ancestors were selected for
this or that and everybody else died off
and now this is what you have well
there's never been any zenbot and
there's never been selection to be a
good zenbot all of this is created on
the Fly this is this is what they do
they create a coherent organism and by
the way if you ask what do skin cells
normally want to do you might think that
well what they normally want to do is to
be this like passive two-dimensional
layer on the outside of an animal to
keep out the bacteria that isn't what
they want to do what that's what they're
bullied into doing by the instructive
interactions with the rest of the cells
if you don't have cells that this is
what they're actually this is their
default this is actually their default
Behavior so what evolution does is what
bioengineers can and will be doing is
behavior shaping it's figuring out
signals to get your agential material
not passive not a blank slate but your
agential material to do whatever you
want it to do so I'm just going to um
close up here with with a couple of
thoughts this is uh this is just a kind
of a an overview of this of this
framework that that we've been working
on this kind of um Continuum of agency
across very diverse uh implement ations
the idea of of of scaling the boundaries
of goals for any particular system as a
way to compare radically different types
of intelligences in different spaces um
bioelectricity is a is a particular
example it's not the only one I'm sure
there are other ways to tell the story
but bioelectricity is a really great way
to look at what is the uh what is the
cognitive medium of a collective
intelligence and that seems to be
electricity in many cases um and there
are all kinds of implications for for
evolution including asking questions
about where
do these goals come from if it's not
just selection where in fact do they
come from and so just to finish up I
want to point out that one of the
consequences of the fact that biology
can solve problems on the Fly and that
it's incredibly interoperable is that
pretty much any combination of evolved
material meaning cells or tissues or
genes designed material so smart
nanomaterials all kinds of constructs
and and software any combination of
these is some viable creature and so
when Darwin said endless forms most
beautiful impress being impressed with a
variety of biology that he was seeing
around that's just all of that
everything on Earth is a tiny corner of
this incredibly huge option space which
we're already beginning to explore so
there are already cyborgs you know
humans with various implants both
sensory and um and affectors people can
run wheelchairs with their minds and
have have all kinds of sensors attached
to them uh HRS which are brains driving
Vehicles instead of biological bodies um
people started a long time ago making
making chimeras so so mules right horses
and donkeys make mules so so you can
start to mix genetic material after that
people would make grafts in plants and
and mix at the cellular level every
combination we are going to be living in
a world where we are surrounded by
agents that don't look like anything
familiar on the philogenetic treat and
this means that we have massive uh
implications for systems of Ethics
because the old uh traditional framework
where you look at something and you ask
where did it come from would it come
from a factory or was it was it natural
and what does it look like does it look
like a fish an ape or a human or you
know or or something else those kinds of
touchstones are going to be completely
useless in uh deciding how to relate to
these beings that are going to be around
us in terms of what do we owe them what
do uh what what can we expect of them
all all of these things we we can we're
not going to be able to rely on familiar
categories of where did it come from and
how much like a like a human does it you
know does it look that's going to be
gone so those things will not survive
the next few decades so we are going to
need to develop novel Frameworks because
life is so good at navigating these
spaces that all of these things are
going to be viable so I'll just close by
saying that um all of this is is
discussed in great detail in various
papers anybody just please email me and
I'll send you everything um I want to
thank the uh the various uh intelligent
beings that contributed to all the work
I showed you so all of our posts PhD
students um the model systems that we
work with they do all the heavy lifting
all the all the slime molds and the the
plener and tap holds and everything else
and of course our our funders and again
uh two disclosures so morphal is a
company around limb regeneration and Fa
systems is a company for um xenobots and
that's it uh thank you so much thank you
for
listening for